Finally, let's talk about the most powerful safety tool of all: a strong safety culture.
A safety culture is the personality of a company when it comes to safety.
It's what people do when no one is watching.
It's the shared belief that safety is more important than any deadline or production target.
So what does a strong safety culture look like?
It's built on several key pillars.
The first is management commitment.
Safety must be a core value championed from the very top of the organization.
When employees see their leaders consistently making decisions that prioritize safety, even when it's difficult, it sends a powerful message.
The second pillar is employee involvement.
In a strong culture, safety isn't just dictated from above; everyone is involved.
Employees are empowered to stop a job if they see something unsafe, they are encouraged to report hazards, and their
suggestions for improvement are taken seriously.
This leads to the third pillar: shared responsibility.
It's the understanding that safety is not just the job of the safety manager, but of every single person on
the team.
It's about looking out for your own safety, and also looking out for the safety of your coworkers.
The final pillar is open communication.
People must feel psychologically safe to raise safety concerns without any fear of being punished or ignored.
When issues are discussed openly and honestly, problems get solved before they become accidents.
When these pillars are in place, safety stops being a program and becomes part of the organization's DNA.
It's how we do business, every day.